Einstein thought quantum mechanics was absurd.

Viewers of Christopher Nolan’s Oscar-hoovering biopic about the physicist J Robert Oppenheimer 
will have learned a lot about the race to build nuclear weapons, but not much about the hero’s 
involvement in arguably a much more important debate: what science ought to be able to tell us 
about reality. Oppenheimer has a walk-on part in Quantum Drama, Jim Baggott and John L Heilbron’s 
account of that epic struggle. Here, he’s introduced as psychologically tender and quoted as 
declaring that Albert Einstein impersonated in the movie by Tom Conti had no understanding of 
or interest in modern physics.

It was indeed once the popular history that by the time the Danish genius Niels Bohr and his comrades 
had built the startling edifice of quantum mechanics Albert Einstein was already too old and set 
in his ways to accept it, and spent the rest of his life kvetching impotently from the sidelines. 
In fact, and as this hugely detailed narrative of the 20th-century battle for the meaning of physics 
emphasises, Einstein’s challenges to the theory were tremendously powerful and inspired decades of 
fruitful research into questions that still are not definitively settled.

Niels Bohr’s base of theoretical operations lent its name to what became known as the Copenhagen 
interpretation of quantum mechanics, according to which  to put it very crudely  subatomic particles 
and maybe bigger things don’t exist anywhere in particular until you look at them. Bohr was unperturbed 
by the implications, trusting in the equations. But Einstein would not accept a style of physics that, 
as he saw it, abandoned its duty to describe the real world. Nor, completely, would his friend 
Schrödinger, whose famous cat – which is somehow both alive and dead in its box until someone opens it 
was intended as a reductio ad absurdum.

This book is at the crunchily technical end of pop science, but also of its highest-quality peak. It 
helps to be able to read an equation or three, but the style is humane and interesting, and also blessed 
with a fantastically dry sense of humour. Among the story’s teeming cast we meet a cooperative 
experimentalist who did indeed find the desired result and could have found any result desired, 
for he faked his experiments, and a physics-curious English theologian, author of too many books.

We can no longer stand on the hill where Heisenberg had an important insight, for the British blew it 
up, not from opposition to quantum mechanics but because it capped a fortress the Germans had used 
during World War II.

The authors also trace how apparently hermetic notions leaked out into the wider culture, particularly 
during the late 1960s and ‘70s when hippies, some scientists among them, sought to unify quantum 
mechanics with Eastern philosophy, resulting in such bestselling if not altogether scientifically 
reliable treatises as The Tao of Physics. The Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli, one of the strongest 
of Einstein’s critics, had himself long been a fascinated adept of Jungian psychoanalysis. He acquired 
more grievances to analyse when his wife, a former cabaret dancer, went off with a chemist, and not a 
very good one.

Following laboratory experiments of exquisitely sensitive design from the 1970s to the present, it now 
seems that there can be no normal system of deterministic cause and effect, of the kind Einstein desired, 
somehow underlying the mysteries of quantum observations. To measure a particle in front of you can 
affect another particle light years away that is entangled with it. It might even be possible for 
macroscopic objects  ones visible to the naked eye, such as a cat or a person  to exist in different 
states simultaneously.

But the struggle to understand what quantum mechanics tells us about the world we live in goes on.
As our authors relate wonderingly near the book’s end, it can seem to imply that objects do not even 
exist until we look at them: modern physics has in some sense wiped the universe clean of things.

There remains a tribe of heterodox hold-outs, however, cleaving to the conviction that science must 
speak of a fundamental reality and that quantum theory must therefore as yet be incomplete. It remains 
too soon to say, perhaps, that old Einstein was wrong.